
--- Page 1 ---
Anatomy & Physiology 
Module 3 – The Integumentary System – Chapter 6 
Developed June 2023 – Jessica Freeze Snyder 
NBCC – Saint John 
Content Covered Within This Module / What you should know! 
 
✓ Structure of the Skin Layers 
o Epidermis, Dermis, Subcutaneous 
✓ Accessory Organs of the Skin 
o Hair, Nails, Receptors, Sweat Glands, Sebaceous Glands 
✓ Functions of the Skin 
o Protection, Temperature Regulation, Sense Organ Activity, Excretion, 
Vitamin D Synthesis  
 
Check out this overview of the integumentary system!  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 2 ---
In short, the integumentary system is our skin and its accessory organs.  
Our skin is the largest body organ and is considered a cutaneous membrane. 
  
Structure of the Skin Layers 
 
 
 
You can see our skin has three primary layers the epidermis, which is our outermost 
layer of skin, the dermis, which is the middle layer; and the hypodermis, which is the 
tissue that lies beneath the skin - it is sometimes not considered a layer of the skin 
according to some literature. 
 

--- Page 3 ---
 
 
Check out this cute - maybe slightly annoying – 
but valuable overview of the layers of the skin! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 4 ---
Epidermis 
✓ The epidermis is the outermost layer of the skin.  
✓ The epidermis is nonvascular, meaning it has no blood vessels present.  
✓ The epidermis receives its nourishment from the dermis layer below. 
✓ The epidermis consists of five distinct layers. 
o Stratum Basale 
o Stratum Spinosum 
o Stratum Granulosum 
o Stratum Lucidum 
o Stratum Corneum 
✓ 95% of the cells in the epidermis are keratinocytes that produce a tough 
fibrous protein called keratin that acts as a waterproof coating to prevent 
water loss. 
✓ 5% of the cells in the epidermis are melanocytes that produce the pigment 
melanin, which gives us our skin color. The more melanin produced, the 
deeper the color of the skin. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://www.pinterest.ca/pin/369295238169140026/ 

--- Page 5 ---
Dermis 
✓ The dermis is 20 times thicker than the epidermis. 
✓ The dermis is composed mainly of connective tissue. 
✓ The dermis gives our skin its mechanical strength through two types of cells 
which are scattered far apart with fibers in between. 
o some fibers are tough and strong and are called collagen fibers. 
o some fibers are more stretchable, and these are called elastic fibers 
✓ The dermis has two distinct layers. 
o the papillary layer 
▪ This layer consists of parallel rows of tiny bumps called dermal 
papillae; these form the ridges and grooves that make up the 
fingerprints and footprints; the ridges develop before birth and 
are unique to each individual. Our pain and touch receptors are 
found here. 
o the reticular layer 
▪ This layer is where collagen and elastic fibers can be found. It also 
contains blood vessels, sweat and oil glands, lymphatic vessels, 
and hair follicles. The Pacini corpuscles (deep pressure receptors) 
are also found here. 
 
https://theory.labster.com/dermis_layers/ 

--- Page 6 ---
 
Hypodermis 
✓ The hypodermis is the foundation layer of the skin, often called 
subcutaneous tissue, superficial fascia. 
✓ In some literature, the hypodermis is not always considered part of the 
integumentary system. 
✓ The hypodermis is mainly composed of adipose tissue that stores fat for 
energy, provides insulation for temperature control, and offers a soft 
cushion for protection. 
✓ The hypodermis attaches the skin to underlying tissues. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://stevegallik.org/the-hypodermis-your-bodys-protective-layer/ 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 7 ---
Accessory Organs of the Skin 
 
The integumentary system also includes accessory organs such as hair, nails, 
receptors, sweat glands, and sebaceous glands.  
 
Hair 
✓ The human body is covered in millions of hairs; there are very few surfaces 
of the body not covered in hair can you guess what they are? 
o lips, palms of the hands, soles of the feet 
✓ Hair consists of three main components…. 
o The hair root, which lies hidden in the follicle 
o The hair shaft, which is the visible part of the hair 
o The hair papilla/bulb is a small cap-shaped cluster of cells located at 
the base of the hair follicle, nourished by the dermal blood vessels; 
this is where hair begins growing. 
✓ The erector pili muscle is attached to the hair follicle; it contracts when we 
are frightened or cold and makes the hair stand up on end, also known as 
“goosebumps”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 8 ---
 
Nails 
✓ The nail is produced by epidermal cells and made of keratin-hardened and 
plate-like. 
✓ Nails consist of three significant components…… 
o the nail body, which is the visible part that we see 
o the nail root, which lies in a groove hidden by the cuticle 
o the lunula, which is the crescent-shaped area nearest the root 
✓ We may see the nail bed change color with changes in blood flow, such as 
poor oxygen perfusion, causing a bluish hue called cyanosis. 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 9 ---
Here’s more Chloe and the Nerb with some great info on hair and nails!  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 10 ---
Sweat Glands 
✓ Sweat glands, also called sudoriferous glands, are found throughout our 
bodies in the dermal layer of the skin. 
✓ There are two types of sudoriferous glands…… 
o Eccrine Glands 
▪ these are the most abundant and are found all over the body. 
▪ they produce a thin watery liquid called perspiration 
▪ this perspiration assists in the elimination of waste from the 
body 
o Apocrine Glands 
▪ these glands are found in the area of the axilla, groin/genital, 
ear canal, eyelid, and nipple areas. 
▪ they secrete a thicker oily fluid that is odorless before microbial 
activity; this means once they interact with the microbes on 
our skin, an odor becomes present 
▪ unlike eccrine glands, which secret continuously, the apocrine 
glands secrete in periodic spurts  
Sebaceous Glands 
▪ these glands are found everywhere hair grows and have tiny 
ducts that open to the hair follicles  
▪ they also secrete oil called sebum “natures skin cream,” which 
prevents drying and cracking 
▪ sebum can accumulate and enlarge in the duct forming white 
“pimples”, once exposed to the air, they blacken “blackheads” 
▪ these glands increase production at puberty and decrease in 
late adulthood 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 11 ---
Receptors 
✓ Our skin is full of sensory receptors called cutaneous receptors. These 
receptors send messages to the brain about what we feel. 
✓ See below what our cutaneous receptors feel….. 
o Mechanoreceptors - this type of receptor is a sensory receptor that 
responds to mechanical pressure or distortion. 
▪ Ruffini’s end organ – skin stretch 
▪ End bulb of Krause – cold 
▪ Meissner’s corpuscle – texture and vibration 
▪ Pacinian corpuscle – deep pressure and fast vibration 
▪ Merkel’s disc – sustained touch and pressure 
▪ Free nerve endings – pain and itch 
 
 
https://knowledgeclass.blogspot.com/2014/12/steps-involved-in-working-of-sensory.html 

--- Page 12 ---
Functions of the Skin 
 
 
Protection 
Our skin is our body's first line of defense against microbes, ultraviolet rays from 
the sun, harmful chemicals, cuts and tears. 
Temperature Regulation 
Our skin plays a vital role in temperature regulation which is controlled by 
sweating and shivering. When we're hot, we sweat. The moisture evaporating 
from the skin helps cool the body. When we are cold, we shiver, our skin gets 
goosebumps, and constricts blood vessels to keep the blood from cooling further. 
Sensation 
Our skin functions as an enormous sense organ, keeping the body informed of 
changes in our environment. 
Excretion 
The skin helps us excrete waste from our body, such as urea (a breakdown of 
protein) and other wastes through sweat. 
Synthesizes Vitamine D 
When skin is exposed to UV light, a substance in the skin cells is transported to the 
liver and kidneys, converting it into an active form of vitamin D. 
Absorption 
Our skin can absorb most anything we place on it through passive diffusion. An 
example of this would be medications through medication patches or creams. 
Sometimes our skin can absorb things we don't want it to, such as toxins 
