
--- Page 1 ---
Anatomy & Physiology 
Module 2 – Cell Basics – Chapter 3 
Developed June 2023 – Jessica Freeze Snyder 
NBCC – Saint John 
 
Content Covered Within This Module / What you should know! 
✓ Define plasma membrane & cytoplasm  
✓ Define and state the function of the three prominent organelles 
o Nucleus, Ribosomes, Mitochondria 
✓ Types of membrane transport 
o Passive Transport 
▪ Diffusion, Osmosis, Filtration 
o Active Transport 
▪ Phagocytes, Pinocytosis 
 
Check out this video for an intro to Cells! 
*we will focus on the Human Cell* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 2 ---
The cell is the basic unit of life! 
The human cell is microscopic in size and controls every aspect of our body.  
They vary in shape and size and have many parts which are responsible for 
different tasks, as shown in the video above. 
For this course, we will focus our attention on the parts highlighted below.  
https://www.vecteezy.com/vector-art/6406474-human-cell-diagram 

--- Page 3 ---
 
 
 
Parts of the Cell 
 
Plasma Membrane 
The plasma membrane encloses the 
cytoplasm (gel-like substance)  
where the cell organelles and nucleus 
are found. Although delicate, the membrane 
is strong enough to keep the whole cell intact. 
The cell membrane consists of a semipermeable lipid bilayer (two layers) – 
semipermeable means it only allows specific items in/out. (we will look at this 
later in the module). 
 
                                                                              
Cytoplasm 
The cytoplasm is a gel-like substance that fills 
 the space between the plasma membrane 
 and the nucleus. The cytoplasm contains 
 small threadlike structures which form the 
 cytoskeleton – this cytoskeleton assists in 
 organizing and supporting the many   
                                                                  organelles within the cell. 
 
 

--- Page 4 ---
   
Organelles of the Cell 
 
As you can see, the cell contains many organelles, each with a specific job.  
We will focus on three of these organelles in this module…….. 
 
Nucleus 
 
https://www.nagwa.com/en/explainers/592184195893/t 
 
The nucleus is the cell’s “control center” and manages the cell’s genetic material. 
Our bodies contain trillions of cells, each with specific jobs; the nucleus contains 
the cell’s DNA which is organized into chromosomes that control the cell’s growth 
and division, allowing each cell to carry out its specific duties. 
The nucleus is enclosed within its own membrane called the nuclear envelope. 
The nucleus contains the nucleolus, which is responsible for producing ribosomes.  
 

--- Page 5 ---
 
 
Ribosomes 
 
 
 
https://www.microscopemaster.com/ribosomes.html 
 
 
Ribosomes are often referred to as the “protein factories” of the cell. They can be 
found floating free within the cytoplasm or attached to the endoplasmic reticulum 
(another organelle). 
Ribosomes contain RNA (ribonucleic acid), which acts as a messenger carrying 
instructions from the DNA for controlling the synthesis of proteins.  
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 6 ---
 
 
Mitochondria  
 
https://www.genome.gov/genetics-glossary/Mitochondria 
 
The mitochondria is often referred to as the “powerhouse” of the cell. It is 
responsible for extracting energy/nutrients from food and converting it into 
chemical energy called ATP.  
ATP aka Adenosine Triphosphate, is a molecule that carries energy within the cells. 
Remember, EVERYTHING our bodies do, is thanks to our cells, and ATP provides 
the energy needed for them to perform the appropriate function.  
   
 
 
 

--- Page 7 ---
Membrane Transport 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Let’s take a closer look  
 
 
 
 

--- Page 8 ---
Active Transport 
✓ Active transport is when a molecule moves across a cell membrane from an 
area of low concentration to an area of high concentration by using cellular 
energy called ATP .  
✓ Active transport can be performed through phagocytosis and pinocytosis. 
 
Phagocytosis = cellular eating 
Phagocytosis is the active process in which a cell uses its plasma membrane to 
engulf a large particle. This process is often seen with our white blood cells to 
destroy invading bacteria.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cellcartoons.net/phagocytosis/ 
https://www.dreamstime.com/illustration/phagocytosis-process.html 
 
Pinocytosis = cellular drinking 
Pinocytosis is another active transport mechanism used to pull                          
fluids or dissolved substances into cells. It works like phagocytosis,                       
but it pulls in fluids instead of particles.   

--- Page 9 ---
Passive Transport 
✓ Is when a substance moves from a area of high concentration to an area of 
low concentration.  
✓ Passive transport can be preformed through diffusion, osmosis and filtration 
 
Diffusion 
Diffusion is the movement of solutes from an area of greater concentration to an 
area of lesser concentration, ultimately leading to the equalization of solutes. 
Similar to phagocytosis in that it moves solutes but because it is moving from an 
area of high to low concentration ATP is not needed.  
 
 
 
 Osmosis 
Similar to diffusion, but instead of moving solutes to an area of lower 
concentration osmosis is the movement of fluid from an area of lower solute 
concentration to an area of higher solute concentration with the goal of equalizing 
the solute concentrations. Similar to pinocytosis in that it moves solutes but 
because it is moving from an area of high to low concentration ATP is not needed.  
 
 
 
 
 
  

--- Page 10 ---
Filtration 
The movement of water and solutes from an area of high hydrostatic pressure to 
an area of low hydrostatic pressure. (this happens in the kidneys). 
 
 
 
 
Check out this video to learn 
more! 