
--- Page 1 ---
Anatomy & Physiology 
Module 4 – The Skeletal System – Chapter 7 
Developed June 2023 – Jessica Freeze Snyder 
NBCC – Saint John 
Content Covered Within This Module / What you should know! 
✓ Functions of the Skeletal System 
o Support, Protection, Movement, Storage, Hematopoiesis 
✓ Define Types of Bones with Example 
o Long, Short, Flat, Irregular, Sesamoid 
✓ Define the Function of Cartilage 
✓ Divisions of the Skeleton & Major Bones 
o Axial Skeleton 
▪ Bones of the Skull, Sinuses, Vertebrae, Thorax 
o Appendicular Skeleton 
▪ Upper Extremities 
▪ Lower Extremities 
✓ Joint Structure and Function 
o Synarthrotic 
o Amphiarthrotic 
o Diarthrotic 
Check out this overview of the skeletal system!  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 2 ---
The skeletal system is composed of joints, ligaments, cartilage and bones. 
 
Functions of the Skeletal System 
1. Our skeleton provides support and provides shape to our bodies; without 
our skeletal system, we would all be like jellyfish! 
2. It protects our vital internal organs; think about it – our brain is protected 
by our skull, the heart and lungs by our ribs, sternum, and so on. 
3. It assists with movement; our bones are attached to muscles by tendons 
when our muscles contract, this tendon pulls on the bones. 
4. Our bones store calcium, which is an essential element that serves an 
important role in our bodies, and the bones are the main storage site for 
this important element. 
5. Hematopoiesis is blood cell production. Our bodies continually make new 
blood cells to replace old ones to ensure we have a healthy supply of blood 
cells to provide oxygen to our tissues, fight infection or clot our blood when 
we're injured - the production of these most important cells take place in 
our bone marrow.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 3 ---
Types of Bones 
 
https://open.oregonstate.education/aandp/chapter/6-2-bone-classification/ 
 
1. Sesamoid bones are usually short irregular bones embedded in a tendon 
where it passes over a joint serving as a protectant for the tendon. The 
most obvious example of this is the Patella or the kneecap, which sits within 
the quadricep tendon. Other sesamoid bones are small and can found in 
our hands and feet. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 4 ---
2. Irregular bones are bones found within the body that do not fall into any 
other category due to their uniform shape. They primarily consist of 
cancellous bone, also known as spongy bone, with a thin outer layer of 
compact bone. Good examples of these are the vertebrae, sacrum, 
mandible, etc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Short bones are defined as being approximately as wide as they are long 
and have a primary function of providing support and stability with little 
movement. They consist of only a thin layer of compact hard bone with 
spongy bone on the inside and have relatively large amounts of bone 
marrow found within. Examples of short bones are the carpals and tarsals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 5 ---
4. Flat bones are, as they sound, strong flat plates of bone, providing 
protection to the body's vital organs and being a base for muscular 
attachment. Anterior and posterior surfaces are formed of compact bone to 
provide strength for protection, with the center consisting of cancellous 
bone, also known as spongy bone, and varying amounts of bone marrow. 
The classic example of a flat bone would be the scapula, sternum, cranium 
or coxae - the pelvis and ribs are also classified as flat bones. 
 
 
 
5. Long bones are some of the largest bones in the body, such as the femur, 
humorous, and tibia but are also some of the smallest, including the 
metacarpals, metatarsals, and phalanges. The classification of a long bone 
includes having a body that is longer than it is wide and includes a growth 
plate at either end - they have a hard outer surface of compact bone, 
spongy bone with the inner bone containing bone marrow on both ends - 
long bones are covered in hyaline cartilage to help protect the bone and aid 
in shock absorption. 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 6 ---
Long Bone Structure 
✓ Diaphysis (dīˈafəsis) or Shaft 
✓ Epiphysis (ih-pif-uh-sis) or ends  
The epiphysis is the area of the long  
bone where bone growth takes place.  
Long bones actually grow from the inside out.  
When the bones need to grow, they grow from  
the epiphyseal plate and push new bone outward.  
When the bone is done growing, the epiphyseal  
plate stops creating cells. 
✓ Articular Cartilage -covers epiphysis and functions  
as a cushion 
✓ Medullary Cavity- hollow area inside diaphysis (shaft)  
of the bone that contains yellow marrow 
✓ Endosteum - thin membrane lining medullary cavity 
✓ Periosteum - strong membrane covering bone  
everywhere except at joint surfaces 
 
 
Check out this video on the bone types! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 7 ---
Cartilage 
Cartilage can be found around our joints (the space between where two bones 
meet). Its fibers are embedded in a gel-like substance as opposed to a calcified 
hard substance like bone. Therefore, cartilage has much more flexibility. Hyaline, 
also known as articular cartilage, when it covers the end of bones at the joint, is 
the most abundant in the body; in fact, our bones in early development are 
completely hyaline cartilage and eventually form into the hard bones we know. 
There are three types of cartilage found in the body 
• Elastic Cartilage - is springy and can be found in the ear 
• Fibrous Cartilage - has many fibers and can be found in the intervertebral 
discs and the pubis 
• Hyaline Cartilage - is smooth and glass-like and can be found where our ribs 
connect to the sternum *remember when hyaline cartilage covers the ends 
of the bones, we then call it articular cartilage 
 
https://www.istockphoto.com/photos/fibrocartilage 

--- Page 8 ---
Divisions of the Skeleton 
 
The skeleton is divided into two sections called the axle and the appendicular. 
Axial 
✓ The axial skeleton is comprised of 80 bones 
✓ it includes the skull, spine, (vertebral column), thorax (ribs and sternum), 
and hyoid bone 
Appendicular 
✓ The appendicular skeleton is comprised of 126 bones 
✓ It includes the upper extremities, including the pictorial girdle and the lower 
extremities, including the pelvic girdle 
The photo below depicts the divisions of the skeleton. You can see that the areas 
highlighted in blue are part of the axial skeleton, and the areas in brown are the 
appendicular skeleton. The bones shone in this photo are some of the major 
bones in the body that you should know. 
This can be found in your textbook as figure 7.9. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 9 ---
Let’s break it down! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
      
  

--- Page 10 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
                                              
                                        
                                                 
                  
                                 
                         
                          
                       
             
               
                                                
                             
                  
                                
                             
                               
                                 
                               
                            
                      
                                

--- Page 11 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
                             
                  
                                
                             
                               
                                 
                               
                            
                      
                                
                 
                
                       
                    
                             
                                   
                    
                                          
                                            
                                                                             

--- Page 12 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
                                       
                 
                           
                            
                                
                    
                                       
                                      
             
              
               
                                   
                        
                    
                                    
                                     
                  
           
                                   
               
--- Page 13 ---
Joint Structure and Function 
 
Almost every bone in our body connects to at least one other bone, essentially 
forming a joint.  
We have only one bone that is not and is anchored by our tongue, which is our 
hyoid bone. 
Our joints are classified into three categories…. 
✓ Synarthroses (sin-are-throw-sees) – no movement 
✓ Amphiarthroses (am-fee-are-throw-sees) – slight movement 
✓ Diarthroses (die-are-throw-sees) – free movement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 14 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diarthroses 
