
--- Page 1 ---
Anatomy & Physiology 
Module 1 – Introduction to the Body – Chapter 1 
Developed June 2023 – Jessica Freeze Snyder 
NBCC – Saint John 
 
Content Covered Within This Module / What you should know!
✓ Levels of organization 
✓ Define homeostasis 
✓ Negative & Positive feedback systems 
✓ Names and location of body cavities 
o Ventral 
▪ Thoracic 
▪ Abdominopelvic (4 quadrants 9 regions) 
o Dorsal 
▪ Cranial 
▪ Spinal 
 
Check out this video for an intro to Anatomy & Physiology! 
 

--- Page 2 ---
Anatomy & Physiology is the NUCLEUS of NURSING! 
 
Anatomy & Physiology remains the cornerstone of many healthcare programs, 
including the PN/PSW program at NBCC. This course explores the structure and 
function of the human body at multiple levels: individual cells, their coming 
together to form tissues, the organization of tissues into organs, organs working 
together as part of organ systems, and finally, how those organ systems support 
one another to maintain the body. 
 
To meet your client’s physiological needs, you must have an understanding of the 
human body and how it works. This knowledge is the foundation for working with 
your clients and will assist you in “putting together the puzzle pieces” regarding 
their illness, history, treatment plan and future. 
 
When it comes to Anatomy & Physiology, it is pertinent that you spare no effort in 
seeking an understanding of the material; memorizing will not be of benefit to 
you; while it can be a challenge, this understanding will assist you through your 
other courses and future career. 
 
A body system cannot work by itself; our systems depend on each other, and 
what happens to one system can affect all others. 
 
What is Anatomy & Physiology? 
 
 
 

--- Page 3 ---
Levels of Organization!
 
Think of the levels of organization like these 
Nesting Dolls! The set is only complete if all 
of the dolls are present. 
 https://www.walmart.ca/en/ip/BestPysanky-Set-of-6-Traditional-Semenov-Matryoshka-Wooden-Russian-Nesting-Dolls-5-5-Inches/PRD1OVSMO905LZL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The human body is organized into structural and functional levels of increasing 
complexity. Each higher level incorporates the structures and functions of the 
previous level, as you will see. Let’s take a look……. 
   
 
https://7jrnbodysystems.weebly.com/ 
 

--- Page 4 ---
 
https://coursewareobjects.elsevier.com/objects/elr/Patton/SandF16e/IC/jpg/labeled/Chapter001/001002.jpg 
 
You can see that each photo shows slightly different ways to view the levels of 
organization, and other photo/literature you view may also differ slightly. Once 
you understand these levels, you will know they essentially mean the same. 
 
https://dlm-econometrics.blogspot.com/2020/12/tomato-tomahto.html 

--- Page 5 ---
Chemical  
All living matter is derived from chemicals which include  
Atoms (the smallest unit of matter) and Molecules.  
Cellular 
The cell is the basic unit of life.  
Each of the many types of cells found within the human body is made of 
chemicals and carries out specific chemical reactions. 
Tissue 
Tissues are a group of cells with similar structure and function. 
Organs 
An organ is a group of tissues precisely arranged to accomplish a specific function. 
Some of these organs are kidneys, liver, lungs, heart etc. 
Organ System 
An organ system is a group of organs contributing to a particular function. 
Organism 
All of these systems make up the individual person or organism.  
All levels function together to keep us alive and maintain homeostasis. 
 

--- Page 6 ---
So, what is homeostasis? 
Homeostasis is the state in which the internal environment of the body remains 
stable by responding appropriately to changes. It is a state of balance among all 
the body systems needed for the body to survive and function correctly.  
 
https://biologydictionary.net/ngss-high-school-tutorials/ls1-3-feedback-mechanisms-and-homeostasis/ 
 
Homeostasis works through feedback mechanisms. Without feedback, 
homeostasis cannot occur. This means that an organism loses the ability to self-
regulate its body. Negative feedback mechanisms are more common in 
homeostasis, but positive feedback loops are also critical. Changes in feedback 
loops can lead to various issues, such as diabetes. 
And this brings us to the next topic……………………….  

--- Page 7 ---
Positive & Negative Feedback Systems 
Survival of the individual and of the genes that make up the body is of the 
utmost importance.  
Survival depends on the maintenance or restoration of homeostasis  
✓ The body’s basic type of control system is called a feedback loop. 
✓ The body uses negative feedback loops and, less often, positive feedback 
loops to maintain or restore homeostasis. 
✓ Feedback loops involve a sensor, a control center, and an effector. 
 
Negative Feedback Loops 
• oppose or negate a change in a controlled condition reversing 
changes back toward a normal value. 
o for example, regulation of blood glucose levels by insulin or 
regulation of body temperature. 
 
Positive Feedback Loops 
• are stimulatory in nature, but instead of opposing a change in the 
internal environment, they enhance or amplify the change 
occurring. 
o for example, uterine contractions during birth; blood clotting. 
 
 
Negative = Works against the change occurring within the body 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://ib.bioninja.com.au/standard-level/topic-6-human-physiology/66-hormones-homeostasis-and/feedback-loops.html 
 

--- Page 8 ---
Positive = Works with the change occurring within the body 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As you can see, both of these feedback systems work toward the same goal (to 
restore or maintain homeostasis) but in different ways. 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 9 ---
 
 
 
As we move through the Anatomy & Physiology course, we will look at all twelve 
body systems and how they work together. 
 
✓ Integumentary 
✓ Skeletal 
✓ Muscular 
✓ Blood 
✓ Cardiovascular 
✓ Respiratory 
✓ Nervous  
✓ Digestive 
✓ Endocrine 
✓ Lymphatic 
✓ Urinary 
✓ Reproductive 
                                                                                    https://biologydictionary.net/body-systems/ 
 
To discuss the body systems in relationship to one another, their location, and 
function, it will be essential to know and understand the related terminology and 
body cavities! 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 10 ---
Body Cavities 
Internally the body is divided into spaces or cavities that contain specific organs. 
The two major cavities are called…. 
• Ventral (front) cavity 
• Dorsal (back) cavity 
 
  
What do these 
letters mean? 
S = Superior 
I = Inferior 
R = Right 
L = Left 
 
 
What do these 
letters mean? 
S = Superior 
I = Inferior 
A = Anterior 
P = Posterior 
 
 
--- Page 11 ---
The Ventral Body Cavity is further divided into two main cavities which are 
separated by the diaphragm. 
1. Thoracic  
a. Mediastinum 
- Midportion of the thoracic cavity 
- Heart and respiratory structures are located here 
b. Pleural 
- Right lung (right pleural cavity) 
- Left lung (left pleural cavity) 
2. Abdominopelvic  
a. Abdominal 
- Stomach, intestines, liver, gallbladder, pancreas and spleen are 
located here 
b. Pelvic 
- Reproductive, urinary bladder and lowest part of the intestine 
are located here 
To make it easier to locate organs in the large abdominopelvic cavity, anatomists 
have divided the abdominopelvic cavity into four quadrants.  
 

--- Page 12 ---
 
Another more precise way health professionals divide the abdominopelvic cavity 
is into   nine regions. 
 
The Dorsal Body Cavity is further divided into two main cavities. 
1. Cranial  
- The brain and space inside the skull are located here 
2. Spinal 
- The spine and space within the spinal column are located here 
 
