
--- Page 1 ---
Anatomy & Physiology 
Module 5 – The Muscular System – Chapter 8 
Developed June 2023 – Jessica Freeze Snyder 
NBCC – Saint John 
Content Covered Within This Module / What you should know! 
✓ Muscle Tissue 
o Skeletal (main focus) 
o Cardiac (brief overview) 
o Smooth (brief overview) 
✓ Define Tendons and Ligaments 
✓ Functions of Skeletal Muscle 
o Movement, Posture, Heat Production 
✓ Muscle Contraction (brief overview) 
✓ Main Skeletal Muscle Groups 
o Head & Neck 
o Upper Extremities 
o Lower Extremities 
o Trunk 
Check out this overview of the skeletal system!  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 2 ---
Muscle Tissue 
Our bodies contain three types of muscle; cardiac, smooth, and skeletal. You can 
see in the photo below that each has slight differences and are responsible for 
different jobs within the body.  
We will take a quick look at each, focusing mainly on the skeletal muscle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://medlineplus.gov/ency/imagepages/19841.htm 
Cardiac Muscle 
✓ Cardiac muscle is known as  
an involuntary muscle because  
we cannot control its contraction;  
it happens through the autonomic  
nervous system 
✓ The bulk of our heart is made of  
cardiac muscle 
✓ The cardiac muscle can be characterized  
by muscle fibers that are branched with  
cross striations 
✓ The cardiac muscle contains intercalated  
discs, which are the major portal for cardiac  
cell-to-cell communication 

--- Page 3 ---
 
Smooth Muscle 
✓ Smooth muscle is known as an  
involuntary muscle because we  
cannot control its contraction it  
happens through the autonomic  
nervous system 
✓ The smooth muscle can be  
characterized as non-striated, unlike  
cardiac muscle and skeletal muscle  
the smooth muscle it's just as the  
name implies smooth and is tapered  
at each end with a weaved type  
appearance 
✓ Smooth muscle can be found in the walls  
of blood vessels, GI tract, bladder etc. 
 
 
 
Skeletal Muscle 
✓ Skeletal muscle is also known as a  
voluntary muscle because we can  
control its movements through the  
somatic nervous system 
✓ It is characterized by its striation  
and many nuclei 
✓ Skeletal muscle is attached to our  
bones by tendons 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 4 ---
Skeletal muscle is composed mainly of skeletal muscle fibers and connective 
tissue and most attached to two bones across the joint. Muscle attachment 
to the more stationary bone is called the origin, where the attachment to 
the more movable bone is the insertion.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tendons & Ligaments 
Tendons Ligaments 
✓ strong cords or sheets of 
fibrous connective tissue that 
extend from the muscle to 
the bone 
✓ some are enclosed in a 
synovial line tube also known 
as a tendon sheath, and are 
often lubricated by synovial 
fluid - this synovial fluid 
comes from synovial lined 
sacs called bursae and are 
located between some 
tendons and underlying 
bones 
✓ as fibrous connective tissue 
that attaches bone to bone 
 
 
 
 
*in short* 
Tendons connect muscle to bone 
and  
Ligaments connect bone to bone! 
 

--- Page 5 ---
Breaking down the Skeletal Muscle from the inside out! 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                          
                                
                                 
                            
                          
                               
                             
                                     
                           
                  
          
                           
                         
                                         
                                      
              
                     
                                     
                                      
                                       
                                   
                                   
           
                                   
                                          
                             
                          

--- Page 6 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You can see here a breakdown 
The different types of 
fascia that was mentioned 
above. Don't be confused 
as in some photos this 
fascia may not be broken down 
into epimysium, perimysium 
or endomysium and may 
simply be called fascia.  
 
 
 
             
                                 
                       
                                     
                                    
                                          
                                                 
                                              
         
                                                 
                                           
                

--- Page 7 ---
Functions of Skeletal Muscles 
 
Movement 
✓ Muscles produce movement pulling on bones through contraction 
✓ An agonist or prime mover is any muscle that performs a given movement 
✓ An antagonist is a muscle that produces a movement opposite to that of 
the agonist 
✓ In addition to agonists and antagonists, there are “helper” muscles called 
synergists 
As you can see in the photo below our muscles do not just perform in one manner 
or the other, but it depends on the movement required which role they play. 
 
                                                
                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Check out this 
video about 
muscle movement! 
--- Page 8 ---
Posture 
✓ Is defined as a continuous, low-strength muscle contraction called a tonic 
contraction that enables us to maintain body position 
o Only a few muscle fibers shorten 
o Produces no movement of body parts 
Heat Production 
✓ Survival depends on the body’s ability to maintain a constant body 
temperature (homeostasis) 
✓ Skeletal muscles produce heat as a byproduct of their contraction. Think 
about it – when we are cold, we shiver – shivering is an involuntary 
contraction of skeletal muscles in response to lower-than-normal body 
temperature.  
 
Muscle Contractions 
✓ When talking about muscle contractions, the motor unit is the combination 
of a motor neuron with the muscle fibers it controls 
✓ Stimulation of a muscle by a nerve impulse is required before a muscle can 
shorten and produce movement 
✓ A motor neuron is the specialized nerve that transmits an impulse to a 
muscle causing a contraction 
✓ The neuromuscular junction is the point of contact between a nerve ending 
and a single muscle fiber 
✓ How much force is required will determine how many muscle fibers receive 
a nerve impulse - this is called the threshold stimulus and allows us to pick 
up a 20-pound weight or a feather. Think of this as an all-or-nothing type 
action; when a muscle fiber goes to work it always puts in full effort 
because we don't need as much effort to pick up a feather as we do a 20-
pound weight only enough fibers to complete the task are stimulated. 
 
 
 

--- Page 9 ---
Types of Skeletal Muscle contractions…. 
✓ Twitch - a twitch contraction is not regular muscle activity but rather a quick 
jerky response to a stimulus and a single contraction of muscle fibers (think 
about the classic eye twitch) 
✓ Tetanic – a tetanic contraction is sustained muscular contractions caused by 
stimuli hitting the muscle in rapid succession (think about a tens machine) 
✓ Isometric - an isometric contraction does not produce a movement; 
although no movement occurs, tension within the muscle increases (think 
about making a fist, your muscles contract, but your arm does not move) 
✓ Isotonic - isotonic contractions produce movement at a joint because the 
muscle changes length. ( think about our daily movements) There are two 
types of isotonic contractions… 
o Concentric, which means the muscle shortens at the insertion end of 
the muscle to move toward the point of origin 
o Eccentric, which means the muscle lengthens under the tension, thus 
moving the insertion away from the origin  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 10 ---
Major Skeletal Muscle Groups 
 
The muscles shown in the following photo are some of the major muscles in the 
body that you should know. 
This can be found in your textbook as figure 10.8. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 11 ---
 
 
