
--- Page 1 ---
Anatomy & Physiology 
Module 6 – The Nervous System – Chapter 9 
Developed June 2023 – Jessica Freeze Snyder 
NBCC – Saint John 
Content Covered Within This Module / What you should know! 
✓ Cells of the Nervous System 
o Neurons and Neurotransmitters 
o Define Nerve Impulse, Function, and how Impulse Occurs (brief) 
✓ Central Nervous System 
o Structure and Function 
▪ Brain Stem 
▪ Cerebellum 
▪ Diencephalon 
▪ Cerebrum (four lobes) 
✓ Peripheral Nervous system 
▪ Presence of 31 pairs of spinal nerves 
▪ Presence of 12 pairs of cranial nerves 
▪ Divisions of the Peripheral Nervous System 
• Autonomic 
o Sympathetic & Parasympathetic  
• Somatic 
o Efferent & Afferent  
 
Check out this overview of the nervous system! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 2 ---
Cells of the Nervous System 
The nervous system comprises the central and peripheral nervous systems and 
two types of cells; one is a neuron, and the other is a glial cell. We will look at 
both, but we’ll mainly focus on the neuron as it is the “nerve cell” with the glial 
cells as its supporters. 
Both are considered types of cells and play a critical role in signal transportation. 
Neurons are more abundant within the peripheral nervous system, and glial cells 
are more productive within the central nervous system; glial cells found outside of 
the central nervous system are called Schwann cells or Satellite cells. 
We will look at both the Central and Peripheral Nervous Systems coming up but 
let’s look at the cells first! 
Glial Cells 
Astrocytes 
➢ star-shaped cells that provide physical and nutritional support for 
neurons & anchor small blood vessels to neurons 
Microglia 
➢ microglia digest parts of dead neurons 
Oligodendroglia  
➢ provide the insulation (myelin) to neurons in the central nervous system 
Ependymal Cells 
➢ play a critical role in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) homeostasis, brain 
metabolism, and the clearance of waste from the brain 
      Satellite cells 
➢ physical support to neurons in the peripheral nervous system. 
      Schwann cells 
➢ provide the insulation (myelin) to neurons in the peripheral nervous 
system 
 
https://ib.bioninja.com.au/options/option-a-neurobiology-and/a1-neural-development/types-of-neuroglia.html 
 
 
 

--- Page 3 ---
Neurons 
➢ Remember back to learning about the cell being the basic unit of life and 
the atom being the basic unit of matter - the neuron, which is also called a 
nerve cell, is considered the basic unit of the nervous system 
➢ There are around 86 billion neurons found in the brain 
➢ Each neuron is connected to another 1000 neurons, creating an incredibly 
complex network of communication to transmit information through the 
body 
 
The Neuron has Three Main Parts! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cell Body aka Soma 
• This is the headquarters of the neuron, in spherical in shape and contains 
the nucleus of the cell and cytoplasm. The job of the cell body is to control 
all of the functions of the cell. It connects to the dendrites and extends into 
the Axon. 

--- Page 4 ---
Axon 
• This is the portion of a nerve cell that carries nerve impulses away from the 
cell body. A neuron has only one Axon that connects it with the other 
neurons; it may be myelinated or unmyelinated.  
*Myelin sheath is a white fatty substance that wraps the 
Axon in segments, it is formed from Schwann cells and 
the indents found in between are called Nodes of Ranvier; 
it acts as an electrical insulator, greatly speeding up the 
action potential conducted 
*Nodes of Ranvier (gaps within the myelin sheath) are spaced out, allowing 
the signal to skip rapidly, increasing the conduction signal 
Dendrites 
• These appendages of the neuron are designed to receive communications 
from other neurons and sensory cells. Most neurons have multiple 
dendrites which extend outward from the cell body to convert signals into 
small electrical impulses and transmit them inward in the direction of the 
cell body. 
 
Check out this video about Neurons!  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 5 ---
When a nerve impulse reaches the end of the Axon, the Axon releases chemicals 
called neurotransmitters. These neurotransmitters travel across the synapse 
between the Axon and the dendrite of the next neuron allowing the nerve 
impulse to travel through the receiving neuron. 
 
What is the synapse you ask? 
The synapse is the place where the Axon of 1 neuron meets the dendrite of 
another. Synapses are also found between neurons and other types of cells, such 
as a muscle cell. The axon of the sending neuron does not actually touch the 
dendrite of the receiving neuron; thus there is a tiny gap between them called the 
synaptic cleft. 
 
 
Check out this video about how neurons send messages!  
 
  
 

--- Page 6 ---
The nervous system is the part of a human's body that coordinates its behavior 
and transmits signals between different body areas.  
 
This system comprises two main parts, the central nervous system, which includes 
the brain and spinal cord, and the peripheral nervous system, which includes the 
nerves that travel through the entire body. 
 
 
 
Central Nervous System 
 
The Brain 
The brain weighs about 3 pounds and is divided into 4 regions - cerebrum, 
cerebellum, diencephalon and the brain stem. 
  
 
Cerebrum 
The cerebrum is the most significant 
part of the brain and can be further 
broken down into the right and left 
hemispheres. 
 
The left hemisphere handles reading, 
writing, and calculations - some call it 
the logical side of the brain. The right 
hemisphere is more visual and deals 
more in creativity, arts, feeling and 
imagination. 
 
Each hemisphere has four lobes that 
have specific bodily responsibilities – 
frontal, parietal, temporal, and 
occipital. 
 
 
 
 
--- Page 7 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cerebellum 
The cerebellum is also known as the 
little brain, and this is the second most 
prominent part of the human brain. 
 
It is composed of white matter tracks 
called Arbor vitae and a thin outer 
layer of gray matter which is highly 
folded. 
 
It has a large surface area for 
processing and controls muscle 
contractions for smooth movement, 
balance, and posture while 
coordinating with other brain areas 
when needed. 
 
 
 

--- Page 8 ---
Diencephalon 
The diencephalon has a central 
location within the human brain, 
sitting just above the brainstem.  
 
It can be divided into 4 main 
structures: the hypothalamus, 
epithalamus, and subthalamus.  
 
It coordinates with the endocrine 
system to release hormones relaying 
sensory and motor signals to the 
cerebral cortex and regulates the 
sleep-wake cycle. 
 
 
 
Brain Stem 
The brainstem is responsible for many 
vital life functions, such as breathing, 
consciousness, blood pressure, heart 
rate, and sleep. 
 
It is the only pathway from the spinal 
cord to the brain. 
The brain stem can be broken into 
three main parts…. 
 
Midbrain  
o a portion of the central nervous system 
associated with vision, hearing, motor 
control, sleep/wake, arousal (alertness), 
and temperature regulation 
Pons 
o controls breathing 
Medulla oblongata 
o contains control centers for heart rate, 
blood pressure, breathing, swallowing, 
and vomiting 
 

--- Page 9 ---
The Spinal Cord 
The spinal cord runs through the vertebrae for maximum protection and 
serves not only as a pathway for nerve impulses to and from the brain but 
also as a center for operating and coordinating reflex actions independent of 
the brain; this reflex arc is an immediate response to a stimulus at the spinal 
level – in short, let’s say we encounter a hot burning surface, we quickly 
move our hand without thought – the message that we touched something 
hot traveled only as far as our spinal cord which in turn quickly sent the 
message back to move our hand – most messages are sent to the brain for 
processing, but our spinal cord is capable of helping us in emergent 
situations. 
* We will look closer at the spinal nerves coming up 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 10 ---
Peripheral Nervous System 
 
The Peripheral Nervous System, or PNS, is part of the nervous system but is 
considered to be outside of the Central Nervous System or CNS (the brain 
and spinal cord).  
The primary function of the PNS is to connect the CNS to the rest of our body. 
Our Brain is the leader, but the peripheral nerves are its support team! 
The peripheral Nervous system consists of thousands of nerves that connect the 
spinal cord to muscles and sensory receptors.  
The peripheral nervous system is divided into two major parts: 
✓ the somatic nervous system 
✓ the autonomic nervous system 
These two divisions are further subdivided into two further divisions. See Below   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 11 ---
The Peripheral Nervous System 
is composed of….. 
  
➢ 12 pairs of nerves that 
emerge from the brain; 
these are called    Cranial 
Nerves 
 
➢ 31 pairs of nerves that 
branch from the spinal 
column; these are called 
the Spinal Nerves  
 
, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       
                                              
                                  
                                                         
                                                               
                                                                      
                                               
                                                             
                                                             
                                                                        
                                                                          
                                                                       
                                 
                                                                           
                                                                           
                                                                   
                                                                    
                           
                                                                      
                     
                                                              
         
                
                      
                     
                    
                        
                 
                      
        
                 
                                         
                                             
                         
                                       
                                            
                
                       

--- Page 12 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Afferent neurons enter the 
spinal cord through the 
dorsal root, carrying signals 
from the body to the brain.  
 
Efferent neurons exit the 
spinal cord from the ventral 
root before interfacing with 
their target muscles. 
 
*Remember the reflex arc – this is 
where it takes place – in one side and 
out the other 
 
 
 
Afferent = Dorsal Root = Sensory Neuron = Sends signals to the BRAIN from the BODY 
Efferent = Ventral Root = Motor Neuron = Sends signals to the BODY from the BRAIN 
             
         
                                         
                   
                                              
                     
                                                
                
                  
               
                   
                
  

--- Page 13 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Think back to this diagram, the peripheral nervous system has two divisions which 
are again divided into two more subdivisions. 
 
The ANS or autonomic nervous system, has two divisions 
✓ Parasympathetic 
✓ Sympathetic 
 
Most organs have dual innervation, which are innervated by the parasympathetic 
and sympathetic nerves. 
 
For example, sympathetic stimulation of the heart increases heart rate, and 
parasympathetic stimulation of the heart decreases its rate. 
Increased sympathetic activity causes constriction of the blood vessels, and 
decreased sympathetic activity causes the blood vessels to dilate. 
 
The sympathetic nervous system is also known as our fight or flight response, 
whereas the parasympathetic nervous system is our rest and digest response 
(regular everyday activity.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 14 ---
Think about it…. You're walking in a dark parking lot at night, and you suddenly hear footsteps 
behind you; you begin to walk a bit faster, and from the corner of your eye see someone dressed 
in black gaining on you. Your heart starts beating faster, you begin to sweat, and you’re 
breathing quickly (your sympathetic nervous system is kicking in). Suddenly you hear a voice say, 
mam, “you forgot your bag at the checkout” and realize it was the teenage cashier just trying to 
catch up to you all along. Your heart rate begins to slow; you stop sweating and begin to breathe 
normally (this is your parasympathetic nervous system bringing your body back to normal 
limits.) 
 
Hint! 
 
Sympathetic = Stress 
 
Parasympathetic = Peace 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 15 ---
The Somatic Nervous System also has two divisions 
✓ Afferent 
✓ Efferent 
The somatic nervous system plays a vital role in initiating and controlling 
movements of the body, that are both voluntary and involuntary. 
 
Its primary function is to connect the central nervous system to 
the body's muscles to control voluntary movements and reflex arcs (remember, 
these happen at the spinal level).  
 
It is responsible for nearly all voluntary muscle movements, as 
well as for processing sensory information that arrives via external 
stimuli, including hearing, touch, and sight. 
 
The somatic nervous system contains two major types of neurons 
(nerve cells): 
Sensory neurons, also known as afferent neurons, are responsible for carrying 
information from the body to the CNS. 
Motor neurons, also known as efferent neurons, are responsible 
for carrying information from the brain and spinal cord to 
muscle fibers throughout the body. 
 
 
Think about it….. you're out for a jog and notice construction ahead on the sidewalk. 
Your visual system perceives this construction and relays the information to your brain. 
Your brain sends signals to engage your muscles to take action, allowing you to turn your 
body and avoid the upcoming construction site. This is an example of voluntary 
movement of the somatic nervous system. 
 
Think about it…. You're cleaning your stove top after supper, not realizing one of the 
burners is still on; without thought, you immediately move your hand. This is because the 
sensory nerves carry signals to the spinal cord but instead of continuing travel to the 
brain the message synapses at the spinal cord level and immediately transmits signals 
back down the motor neurons of the spine to trigger the reflex. This is an example of 
involuntary movement of the somatic nervous system through a reflex arc. 
--- Page 16 ---
Hint! 
 
Afferent = Arrives 
 
Efferent = Exits 
 
 
 
Check out this video to tie it all together!  
 
