
--- Page 1 ---
Anatomy & Physiology 
Module 8 – The Endocrine System - Chapter 11 
Developed June 2023 – Jessica Freeze Snyder 
NBCC – Saint John 
Content Covered Within This Module / What you should know! 
✓ General Functions of the Endocrine System 
✓ Hormones 
o General actions and Types 
▪ Steroid – Nonsteroid – Prostaglandin 
o Regulation of Secretion 
▪ Negative and Positive Feedback 
✓ Specific Glands : Location, Function, and Associated Hormones 
o Hypothalamus – RH, IH 
o Pituitary Gland - TSH, growth hormone, ACTH, ADH 
o Thyroid gland - T3, T4, calcitonin 
o Parathyroid gland - PTH 
o Adrenal Glands - mineral corticoids and glucocorticoids -aldosterone, 
sex hormones, epinephrine, norepinephrine 
o Pancreas – islet of Langerhans - insulin and Glucagon 
o Thymus Gland – thymosin 
o Pineal Gland- melatonin 
Check out this overview of the endocrine system! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 2 ---
General Function of the Endocrine System 
 
The endocrine system is much like our nervous system because it communicates 
and helps control our body. 
 
The difference is that the nervous system works quickly through fast nerve 
impulses, whereas the endocrine system works slower through hormones 
secreted into the blood. 
 
 
Hormones 
So then, what are hormones? Hormones are chemical substances that act like 
messengers by traveling in the blood through the body. After being made in one 
part of the body in the endocrine organs, they travel to other parts where they 
help control how cells and organs do their work; because they travel through the 
blood, they flow through the entire body but can only affect cells that have 
receptors called target cells. 
 
 
Types of Hormones 
 
1. Steroid Hormones 
Steroid hormones are lipid soluble and bind to receptors in the cell. 
2. Nonsteroid Hormones 
Nonsteroid hormones are water-soluble and bind to receptors 
outside of the cell 
3. Prostaglandins 
Prostaglandins, also known as tissue hormones, are essential and 
potent lipid substances found in various tissues. In many instances, 
prostaglandin is produced in a tissue and diffuses only a short 
distance to act on cells within that tissue. 
 
 
--- Page 3 ---
Feedback & Hormones 
 
Regulation of hormone levels in the blood depends on the homeostatic 
mechanism called negative feedback. For example, insulin lowers blood sugar 
levels which are high after eating a meal; this simulates the release of insulin from 
the pancreas; the insulin assists in the transfer of sugar from the blood into the 
cells, and blood sugar levels return to normal. As the levels drop, the endocrine 
cells in the pancreas slow their production and insulin release. 
 
Positive feedback amplifies changes rather than reverse them. For example, 
oxytocin produced in the hypothalamus stimulates uterine contractions and 
produces more hormones during labor, causing the uterine contractions to 
become stronger by means of this positive feedback, in turn assisting in the 
childbirth process. 
 
**Review Negative and Positive Feedback in Module 1** 
 
Glands of the Endocrine System 
 
We will take a closer look at each of these glands excluding the ovaries and testes 
which we will talk about further in the reproductive system modules. 
 ndocrine glands are ductless
glands of the endocrine system
that secrete hormones  directly
into the blood.
 he ma or glands of the endocrine
system include the  
Pituitary gland
Pineal gland
Pancreas
 varies
Testes
Thyroid gland
Parathyroid gland
Hypothalamus
Adrenal glands
Thymus
                

--- Page 4 ---
Hypothalamus 
 
The hypothalamus gland is critical 
because it links the endocrine and 
nervous systems. The hypothalamus is 
located on the undersurface of the 
brain and lies just below the thalamus 
and above the pituitary gland. The 
hypothalamus produces releasing and 
inhibiting hormones which stop and 
start the production of other 
hormones through the body. It 
controls the functions of many other 
endocrine glands. 
 
Pituitary Gland 
 
 
The pituitary gland is about the size of 
a pea and is located at the base of the 
brain. The pituitary gland is often 
referred to as the master gland 
because it is not only secrets its own 
hormones but tells other glands when 
to produce hormones. 
 
The pituitary gland has two lobes… 
• posterior lobe 
• anterior lobe 
 
 
The anterior lobe of the pituitary produces and releases (secretes) six main 
hormones……  
1. Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), also called corticotropin, which 
stimulates the adrenal glands to produce cortisol and other hormones 
2. Follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone (the 
gonadotropins), which stimulate the testes to produce sperm, the ovaries 
to produce eggs, and the sex organs to produce sex hormones 
(testosterone and estrogen) 
3. Growth hormone, which regulates growth and physical development and 
has significant effects on body shape by stimulating muscle formation and 
reducing fat tissue 

--- Page 5 ---
4. Prolactin, which stimulates the mammary glands of the breasts to 
produce milk 
5. Thyroid-stimulating hormone, which stimulates the thyroid gland to 
produce thyroid hormones 
6. Luteinizing Hormone (LH) 
Stimulates maturation of ovarian follicle and ovum, stimulates the 
secretion of estrogen in females and stimulates the interstitial cells of the 
testes to secrete sperm. 
 
The posterior lobe of the pituitary produces only two hormones…… 
1. Vasopressin (also called antidiuretic hormone) regulates the amount of 
water excreted by the kidneys and is, therefore important in 
maintaining water balance in the body. 
2.  xytocin causes the uterus to contract during childbirth and immediately 
after delivery to prevent excessive bleeding. Oxytocin also stimulates 
contractions of the milk ducts in the breast, which move milk to the 
nipple (the let-down) in lactating women. Oxytocin has some additional 
roles in both men and women. 
 
 hyroid Gland 
 
 
The thyroid gland can be found at the 
front of the neck under the voice box. 
It is butterfly shaped and each of the 
two sided lobes lie against and around 
the trachea and are connected at the 
front by a narrow strip of tissue. The 
thyroid gland plays a major role in 
metabolism, growth and development 
of the human body it helps to regulate 
many body functions by constantly 
releasing a steady amount of thyroid 
hormones into the bloodstream such 
as Calcitonin (CT) which inhibits the 
breakdown of bone and Thyroxine T4 
& triiodothyronine T3 which Stimulate 
energy and metabolism of all cells. 

--- Page 6 ---
 
 
 
 
Parathyroid Gland 
 
 
 
The parathyroid glands are located 
behind the thyroid and are about the 
size of a grain of rice they assist in 
regulating calcium levels in the blood 
with their hormone PTH also known as 
the parathyroid hormone, which 
stimulates the breakdown of bone and 
causes an increase in blood calcium 
concentration. 
 
Adrenal Glands 
 
 
The adrenal glands are small 
triangular-shaped glands located on 
the top of each kidney. They produce 
hormones that help regulate our 
metabolism, immune system, and 
blood pressure in response to stress as 
well as other essential functions 
through the hormones aldosterone, 
which regulates electrolyte and fluid 
homeostasis, cortisol which helps 
control blood sugar levels regulate 
metabolism and helps reduce 
inflammation and assist with memory 
formulation, androgens which 
simulate sexual drive in females and 
epinephrine which intensifies the 
sympathetic nervous system response 
during stress. 
 
 

--- Page 7 ---
 
 
Pancreas 
 
 
The pancreas is also called islets of 
Langerhans and it helps our body 
break down and use food. It is unique 
in its involvement in both the digestive 
and endocrine systems. As part of the 
digestive system, it secrets enzymes 
into the small intestine, which helps 
break down food into smaller 
components for proper digestion and 
absorption. As part of the endocrine 
gland, it secretes two hormones that 
are crucial to metabolism. These two 
hormones are glucagon which 
stimulates liver glycogenolysis, causing 
an increase in blood glucose levels, 
and insulin which promotes glucose 
entry into the cells, causing a decrease 
in blood glucose levels. 
 
 hymus Gland 
 
 
The thymus gland is located in the 
upper part of the chest behind the 
breastbone. It is most active during 
childhood and youth, and by late 
adulthood, most of the thymus 
comprises fat tissue. It plays a crucial 
role in immunity through its primary 
function of maturing T cells and 
producing thymosin that promotes 
immune system cell development. 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 8 ---
 
Pineal Gland 
 
 
The penile gland is located deep in the 
brain in an area called the 
epithalamus, where the two halves of 
the brain join. It is often called the 
third eye because of its connection 
with light and dark. It secrets the 
hormone melatonin, which is secreted 
more when it is dark, which explains 
melatonin’s role in sleep. 
 
 
Ovaries Included in the Reproductive System 
 
 estes Included in the Reproductive System 
 
More about Hormones with Chloe and the Nerb! 
 

--- Page 9 ---
Wanna learn more?!?  
