
--- Page 1 ---
Anatomy & Physiology 
Module 7 – The Senses - Chapter 10 
Developed June 2023 – Jessica Freeze Snyder 
NBCC – Saint John 
Content Covered Within This Module / What you should know! 
✓ General Definitions and Functions 
✓ Vision 
o Structure and Function of the Eye 
o Main layers of the eye  
▪ Fibrous, Vascular, Inner 
▪ Fluids of the Eye – aqueous and vitreous humor 
✓ Hearing 
o Structure and Function of the Ear 
▪ External, middle, inner 
o Hearing Process 
o Equilibrium and Balance 
✓ Taste 
o Chemoreceptors 
✓ Smell 
o Olfactory receptors  
 
Check out this overview of the senses! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 2 ---
General Definitions and Functions 
 
Sense organs are classified as either general sense organs or special sense organs. 
 The general sense organs, also known as sensory receptors, are distributed 
throughout the body in the skin, muscles, tendons, joints, and other internal 
organs of the body.  
The special sense organs are responsible for the special senses of smell, taste, 
vision, hearing, and equilibrium. 
 
General Sense Organs / Sensory Receptors 
Photoreceptors Light 
Chemoreceptors Chemical Changes 
Nociceptors Injury/Pain 
Thermoreceptors Temperature Changes 
Mechanoreceptors Touch 
Proprioceptors Position of the Body 
 
Special Sense Organs 
 
 

--- Page 3 ---
Sight – The Eye 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Layers of the Eye 
1. Fibrous layer 
a. The sclera is part of the fibrous layer, the white part of our eye. 
b. The transparent circle on the anterior of the fibrous layer is called the 
cornea. 
2. Vascular layer 
a. The choroid contains a large amount of dark pigment called melanin. 
This dark layer helps prevent the scattering of incoming light rays, 
which could make it hard for the eyes to focus on an image 
b. The ciliary Muscle is an involuntary muscle that is attached by a 
ligament that also attaches to the lens of the eye 
c. The iris is the colored part of our eye 
d. The lens of the eye lies directly behind the pupil; the lens assists us 
with focusing on objects near and far 

--- Page 4 ---
 
3. Inner layer 
a. The retina makes up most of the inner layer of the eye. It contains 
microscopic photoreceptor cells to detect light; most of these 
receptors are called rods and cones because of their shape 
b. The optic nerve  and retinal blood vessels can also be found in the 
inner layer of the eye 
 
Fluids of the Eye 
The eye contains two primary fluids called humors, they are separated by the lens, and assist in 
maintaining ocular pressure and the shape of the eye. Aqueous humor is a water-like fluid that 
lies in front of the lens. It provides nutrients to the eye as well as draining excess waste from the 
eye. Vitreous humor is a gel-like substance that lies behind the lens and in front of the retina.It 
assists with maintaining the shape of the eye, acts as a shock absorber as well as vision clarity.  
 
 
Check out this overview of the eye…..ok it’s a little annoying, but a great visual! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 5 ---
Hearing – The Ear 
 
 
 
1. External Ear 
• The external ear has two parts the auricle, also known as the pinna, 
and the external acoustic canal. The auricle is the appendage on the 
side of the head surrounding the opening of the external acoustic 
canal, which extends into the temporal bone and ends at the 
tympanic membrane, also known as the eardrum. 
2. Middle Ear 
• The middle ear is a tiny and very thin epithelium-lined cavity. It is an 
air-filled space that houses the three smallest bones in the body 
called the ossicles, malleus, and stapes. Believe it or not, these bones 
help that's here through sound waves vibrating against them. 
3. Inner Ear 
• The inner ear consists of three spaces and is divided into the 
following parts the vestibule, semicircular canals and cochlea. 

--- Page 6 ---
Check out this overview of the ear…..ok it’s a little annoying, but a great visual! 
 
 
The mechanical receptors for our sense of balance, also known as equilibrium, are 
located within the inner ear. Nerves from these mechanical receptors within the 
vestibule join those from the semicircular canals and form the vestibular nerve. 
The vestibular nerve joins with the cochlear nerve to form the vestibular cochlear 
nerve also known as cranial nerve VIII.       Check it out!  
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 7 ---
Taste 
 
 
 
Our sense of taste, or gustation, allows us to analyze food before we bite or 
swallow it chemically. The taste buds are the sense organs of taste, and they 
contain supporting cells and chemoreceptors called gustatory cells. These cells 
generate nervous impulses to the brain. Most taste buds are located on the sides 
of the tongue and are called papillae. 
Check it out!  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 8 ---
Smell – The Nose 
 
 
The sense of smell is also called olfaction and helps us detect specific chemicals in 
our environment. The chemoreceptors responsible for olfaction are located in a 
small area of epithelial tissue in the upper part of the nasal cavity. The location of 
these olfactory receptors is somewhat hidden, and sometimes we have to sniff 
harder to smell delicate odors. The signal sent through these olfactory receptors 
travels through the olfactory nerve also known as cranial nerve I. 
Check it out!  
 
 
 
